Autopilot docs (#207)
cowprotocol/docs: docs/cow-protocol/tutorials/arbitrate/autopilot.md

Other information can only be retrieved onchain and is updated every time a new block is mined. For example, it needs to know from the protocol:

- Which [pre-signatures](/cow-protocol/reference/core/signing-schemes#presign) have been set
- If new [eth-flow orders](/cow-protocol/tutorials/cow-swap/native#eth-flow) have been created
- Tracking which orders have been [invalidated](/cow-protocol/reference/contracts/core/settlement#invalidateorder) by the user
- Detecting if a batch has been settled and it should prepare a new auction

Retrieved information isn't limited to the CoW Protocol itself.
The autopilot needs to provide a reference price for each token in an order (a numéraire);
the reference price is used to normalize the value of the [surplus](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/the-problem), since the surplus must be comparable for all orders and an order could use the most disparate ERC-20 tokens.
The reference token is usually the chain's native token, since it's the token used to pay for the gas needed when executing a transaction. 
Orders whose price can't be fetched are discarded and won't be included in an auction.

> Native token price fetching is handled by a integrated price estimator in the autopilot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Native token price fetching is handled by an integrated price estimator in the autopilot.
```

The price is fetched from multiple sources and may change based on the current configurations.

> Prices are both queried from a list of selected existing solvers as well as retrieved internally to the autopilot (for example, by querying some external parties like Paraswap and 1inch, but also by reading onchain pool data as Uniswap).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prices are both queried from a list of selected existing solvers as well as retrieved internally by the autopilot (for example, by querying some external parties like Paraswap and 1inch, but also by reading onchain pool data as Uniswap).
```

> Orders that can't be settled are filtered out: these are expired orders, those with not enough balance, with missing approvals, or that use tokens that aren't supported by the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orders that can't be settled are filtered out, such as:
* expired orders
* insufficient balances
* missing approvals; or 
* that use tokens that aren't supported by the protocol
```

Author: I rephrased a bit to make it sound nicer in a list form, but I've otherwise applied this suggestion.

The autopilot also checks that [ERC-1271](/cow-protocol/reference/core/signing-schemes#erc-1271) signatures are currently valid.

More in general, the autopilot aims to remove from the auction all orders that have no chance to be settled.
Still, this doesn't mean that all orders that appear in the auction can be settled: orders whose ability to be settled is ambigous or unclear are remitted to the solvers' own judgment.

## Solver competition

Once an auction is ready, the autopilot sends a `/solve` request to each solver.
Solvers have a short amount time (seconds) to come up with a [solution](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/the-problem#solution) and return its _score_ to the autopilot.

> The score is the quality of the solution, which accounts for surplus and fee paid, and represents what CoW Protocol intends to optimize with the solver competition; it's described in details in the [description of CoW Protocol's optimization problem](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/the-problem).

Reviewer: I'd suggest compressing this further such that all details are farmed out to `the-problem` / technical reference and reduce duplication as much as reasonably practicable.

Author: Done. I'd like to keep the word "quality" in there because the linked page uses that instead of "score". Let me know if I should simplify further.

The autopilot selects the winner based on this score once the allotted time expires or all solvers have returned their batch proposal.

Up to this point, the autopilot only knows the score and not the full solution that achieves that score.
The autopilot then asks the winning solver to reveal its score (through `/reveal`) and then to execute the corresponding settlement transaction (`/settle`).

> The solver is responsible for executing the transaction onchain (through the [driver](driver)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The solver is responsible for executing the transaction onchain (through the [driver](driver) if using the reference implementation).
```

---
sidebar_position: 2

> draft: true

Reviewer 2: @mfw78 How can we make it show up above Driver and Solver Engine in the sidebar?

![image](https://github.com/cowprotocol/docs-v2/assets/1200333/918843f7-adb8-4aaa-a454-abafd9078ab5)

Reviewer: The way to do this is either in the `category.json`, or in the front-matter (the information between the `---` at the top of the YAML). By setting `sidebar_position`, the docs can be ordered this way. I've gone through and pushed these changes to order the docs correctly on this branch.

Author: For reference, this was done in commit b3089c2dd35913b4f65ff9b16e999d658a662429.

# Autopilot

The autopilot is the engine that drives forward CoW Protocol.

Running at a regular interval, it keeps an up-to-date view on the state of the protocol,
synthesizes this data into an _auction_,
broadcasts this auction to each of the solvers,

> and finally chooses which solution will be executed.

Reviewer 2: are all these newlines intended?

> Users don't interact with the autopilot directly: its only intended interface is with the solvers (through the driver).

Reviewer 2: Link to the driver (which should be the next logical page on the chain through the system)

```suggestion
Users don't interact with the autopilot directly: its only intended interface is with the solvers (through the [driver](driver)).
```

> Unlike solvers, there is a single autopilot running for each chain[^barn].

Reviewer 2: Not sure how this relates to solvers?
```suggestion
There is a single autopilot running for each chain[^barn].
```

Its role can be broadly summarized into these main purposes.

> 1. Data collection, which is mainly:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Cutting auctions:
  - Data availability consensus around which orders are valid for a given batch
  - The initial exchange rates for each traded tokens which are used to normalize surplus across different orders
```

>    - Liquidity gathering

Reviewer 2: The autopilot no longer gathers liquidity

   - Order information
2. Cutting auctions

> 3. Solver competition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Solver competition
  - Data availability consensus around the available solution candidates and their score
  - Notifying the winning solver to submit their solution
```

4. Auction data storage

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

>     participant orderbook

Reviewer 2: I'd remove the orderbook as a participant as it doesn't really play a direct role in the lifecycle of the auction (we can add in writing that the database is populated by the orderbook)

Reviewer 3: I'd also rename `driver` to `solver` and drop one of them. Having 2 should be sufficient to understand the `1:n` relationship without bloating the diagram.

    participant database
    participant blockchain
    participant autopilot

>     box external drivers

Reviewer 2: As far as the autopilot is concerned it's communicating with solvers (which usually consist of a driver and solver engine), but this is an implementation detail from the autopilot perspectives and hopefully solvers will soon build their own integrated solvers that serve both purposes.

```suggestion
    box external solvers
```

      participant driver 1
      participant driver 2
      participant driver 3
    end

    par data retrieval
      # database orders
      orderbook->>database: Update database
    and
      autopilot->>+database: Get order information
      database->>-autopilot: Uids, signatures, owners...
    and
      autopilot->>+blockchain: Get order information
      blockchain->>-autopilot: Onchain cancellations, ETH flow...
    and
      autopilot->>+blockchain: Get liquidity

>       blockchain->>-autopilot: Uniswap, Balancer, ...

Reviewer 2: Liquidity is now fetched by the driver and only if configured as such. The only reason the autopilot still depends on on-chain liquidity is for native price estimates (which should mid-term also be done by the connected solvers)

```suggestion
```

    end

    # auction
    Note over autopilot: Cut auction
    par broadcast current auction
      autopilot->>driver 1: /solve
      activate driver 1
    and
      autopilot->>driver 2: /solve
      activate driver 2
    and
      autopilot->>driver 3: /solve
      activate driver 3
    end
    driver 3->>autopilot: Proposed batch
    deactivate driver 3
    driver 1->>autopilot: Proposed batch
    deactivate driver 1
    driver 2->>autopilot: Proposed batch
    deactivate driver 2

    Note over autopilot: Pick winner
    autopilot->>+driver 2: /reveal
    driver 2->>-autopilot: Ethereum transaction data
    autopilot->>+driver 2: /settle
    driver 2->>+blockchain: Execute transaction
    blockchain->>-driver 2: Transaction receipt
    driver 2->>-autopilot: Transaction hash

    autopilot->>database: Store auction data
```

[^barn]: There is technically also a second autopilot running on each network for testing purposes (in the _barn_ environment), but this isn't necessary for running the protocol.

## Data collection

> The autopilot needs to have a complete overview of the protocol and of many other third-party protocols in order to build an [auction](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/schema) that is as complete as possible.

Reviewer 2: What other third party protocols does the autopilot need to have an overview of?

Author: This was intended to be about liquidity, but since it isn't relevant anymore I removed this direct references to external protocols.

- Which [pre-signatures](/cow-protocol/reference/core/signing-schemes#presign) have been set
- If new [eth-flow orders](/cow-protocol/tutorials/cow-swap/native#eth-flow) have been created
- Tracking which orders have been [invalidated](/cow-protocol/reference/contracts/core/settlement#invalidateorder) by the user
- Detecting if a batch has been settled and it should prepare a new auction

Retrieved information isn't limited to the CoW Protocol itself.
The aution data also contains information on which liquidity is available to the solvers to settle an auction's orders.
Solvers may use this liquidity information to help them out with finding a solution more quickly.
Some liquidity sources are also used to provide a reference price of each token in an order;
the reference price is used to normalize the value of the [surplus](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/the-problem), since the surplus must be comparable for all orders and an order could use the most disparate ERC-20 tokens.

Examples of liquidity sources that are tracked by the autopilot:
- Uniswap (v2 and v3)
- Balancer (Weighted, Weighted2Token, ComposableStable, ...)
- SushiSwap

> - Swapr

Reviewer 2: This needs a re-write

## Cutting auctions

The autopilot constantly updates the list of orders that can be settled based on the data retrieved above.

Orders that can't be settled are filtered out: these are expired orders, those with not enough balance, with missing approvals, or that use tokens that aren't supported by the protocol.

The autopilot also checks that [ERC-1271](/cow-protocol/reference/core/signing-schemes#erc-1271) signatures are currently valid.

> This steps tries to guarantees that all available orders can be settled on CoW Protocol without further checks from the solvers.

Reviewer 2: I thought we are less strict now about the filtering at the autopilot level (ie. if a user has 1 WETH but two open orders selling 1WETH, we forward both orders and let the driver do the advanced filtering)

Reviewer 3: We filter orders partially in the `autopilot`. If a user only has 0.5 ETH we filter out all orders that sell more than that because there is absolutely no way they can be solved. (for partially fillable orders we only require the user to have at least 1 wei)
But if that user has 10 0.4 ETH orders we forward all of them to the solvers and let them figure out which one to prioritize.
So we filter out some orders but that does not yet guarantee that a solver can pick and solve any number of the orders without checks.

Author: I removed this line.
It feels like there should be an explanation here on why we prune the orders and we don't let the solvers get all of them regardless of these checks. (For example, a solver might be able to see that, after settling an order, a user would have enough balance to settle another one.)
I'm not sure what to write, however.

Reviewer 3: > (For example, a solver might be able to see that, after settling an order, a user would have enough balance to settle another one.)

This case doesn't really work, though. All orders happen atomically so there is no before and after within the same block.

> I'm not sure what to write, however.

I would write something like the `autopilot` only filters out orders that are guaranteed to be unsettleable. All orders where it's ambiguous/unclear get forwarded to the solver to let it decide instead.

## Solver competition

> Once an auction is ready, the autopilot sends a `/solve` request to each solver's driver.

Reviewer 2: For the protocol perspective we should not leak the differentiation between driver and solver engine (it's just a solver)

```suggestion
Once an auction is ready, the autopilot sends a `/solve` request to each solver.
```

> Solvers have a short amount time (seconds) to come up with a [solution](/cow-protocol/core/auctions/the-problem#solution) and return its _score_ to the autopilot.

Reviewer 3: Should we give a broad explanation of what the `score` is?
We could change the exact details of the score so we should probably not mention a formular but maybe saying that it roughly describes the efficiency, quality, goodness (or sth like that) of a solution would be useful.

Author: I expanded a bit but I think it's important and independent enough that it deserves its own page. It would be nice to have a dedicated page explaining why the score is what it is and the research that went into it.

The autopilot selects the winner based on this score once the allotted time expires or all drivers have returned their batch proposal.

Up to this point, the autopilot only knows the score and not the full solution that achieves that score.

> The autopilot then asks the winning solver to reveal its score (throug `/reveal`) and then to execute the corresponding settlement transaction (`/settle`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The autopilot then asks the winning solver to reveal its score (through `/reveal`) and then to execute the corresponding settlement transaction (`/settle`).
```

> The solver is responsible for executing the transaction onchain (through the driver).

Reviewer 3: Making the differentiation of `driver` + `solver` is not needed from the perspective of the `autopilot`.

## Auction data storage

> The data returned by the solver is stored by the autopilot on the database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data returned by the solver is stored by the autopilot in the database.
```

Other auction data is recorded as well, for example surplus fee for limit orders and the score returned by each solver.
It also records the result of executing the settlement onchain in order to track the difference in score caused by negative or positive slippage.

This data will be used to compute the [solver payouts](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/rewards).
## Complexities

A typical challenge in the autopilot is handling block reorgs.

> The autopilot must be able to revert as many actions as possible in case of a reorg; everything that can't be reverted must be accounted for in the stored data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The autopilot must be able to revert as many actions as possible in case of a reorg; everything that can't be reverted must be accounted for in the stored data.

In practice this means that some information (e.g. competition data by transaction hash) is only available after a "reorg safe" threshold of blocks have been proposed.
```

## Solver competition

Once an auction is ready, the autopilot sends a `/solve` request to each solver.

> Solvers have a short amount time (seconds) to come up with a [solution](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/the-problem#solution) and return its _score_ to the autopilot, which represents the quality of a solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solvers have a short amount of time (seconds) to come up with a [solution](/cow-protocol/reference/core/auctions/the-problem#solution) and return its _score_ to the autopilot, which represents the quality of a solution.
```
